Hi there, I'm Tom Peperkamp,
a platform Product Owner,
back with a bonus episode in
our Platform Engineering series.
We have journeyed through
the evolution of DevOps,
demystified Internal
Developer Platforms,
embraced the
Platform-as-a-Product mindset,
and charted the course
from Vision to Goal.
But what if the structure of our
teams is fundamentally shaping
or hindering our technical
architecture and flow?
Today, we're exploring the
Inverse Conway Maneuver:
organizational
design for fast flow.
We'll unpack the
famous Conway's Law
and see how our communication
paths dictate our system designs.
Then, we'll explore how
to flip this law on its head!
Can we intentionally
design our teams
to achieve the
architecture we need?
Along the way,
we'll touch on
why some setups feel like
a frustrating 'man behind the
curtain' from the Wizard of Oz,
how we can aim for the reliable
self-service of a vending machine,
and ultimately pave a smooth
'Yellow Brick Road' for our developers.
How do we engineer our
organization for success? Let's dive in!
Let's kick things off by understanding
the foundation: Conway's Law.
Back in 1968, computer
scientist Melvin Conway
made a profound observation
about the relationship between
how we organize
ourselves and what we build.
His original wording was:
"Any organization that designs
a system (defined broadly)...
...will produce a
design whose structure...
...is a copy of the organization's
communication structure."
Think about that for a moment.
It suggests that the way
our teams talk to each other,
or don't talk to each other,
inevitably shapes the architecture
of the software we create.
This law implies that if your organization
is structured in functional silos,
with walls between teams,
the systems you build
will likely mirror those silos,
making smooth end-to-end
flow incredibly difficult to achieve.
While it's an
observation from 1968,
this 'mirroring' effect
remains a powerful lens
to understand why certain
organizational structures
persistently create
friction in modern systems.
It helps diagnose problems,
even if the solutions lie
in more recent principles.
Now, if Conway's Law tells us
that our organizational
communication structure
will be mirrored in
our system design,
what happens when we
try to ignore that reality?
The authors of "Team Topologies"
identify several common obstacles
that prevent teams from
achieving a fast flow of change.
Look at this diagram,
taken directly from their book.
Notice one key
obstacle listed right there:
"Pushing Against Conway’s Law".
This means trying to
force a system architecture
that fundamentally clashes with how
your teams are structured and communicate.
It's like trying to fit a square
pack into a round hole.
When the natural communication pathways
don't support the desired architecture,
you introduce friction, dependencies,
misunderstandings, and delays.
You're essentially
swimming against the current,
and that inevitably slows things down,
blocking the smooth flow we're aiming for.
It often underlies many of the
other obstacles you see listed here.
This comic hits the nail
on the head, doesn't it?
If Conway's Law holds true
that our communication
structures dictate our system design,
and management is responsible
for defining those structures,
well, the punchline
follows logically:
Management ends up designing
the software architecture,
whether
they realize it or not!
This brings us
to a crucial point:
The role of
engineering managers,
and indeed all leadership
involved in organizational design,
extends far beyond
traditional people management.
The way they shape the teams,
define their boundaries,
and influence their communication
patterns – the 'team-of-teams' structure –
has a direct and profound
impact on the success,
maintainability, and adaptability
of the digital products being built.
It's organizational engineering with
significant technical consequences.
So, if management inadvertently
designs our architecture
through organizational
structure,
how should we
respond to this reality?
Martin Fowler outlines three
main approaches on his website.
First, you could simply
ignore Conway's Law.
Maybe you haven't heard of it,
or perhaps you think it doesn't
apply... (narrator: it does!).
Fowler notes, "The first step
in dealing with Conway's Law...
...is to know not to fight it."
This leads to the
second option: accept it.
Recognize its impact, and
consciously design your architecture
so it doesn't clash with how
your teams naturally communicate.
As Fowler says, "Accepting
Conway's Law is superior to ignoring it.”
But there's a third, more proactive,
and often recommended option:
the Inverse Conway Maneuver.
This is where we
intentionally change
the communication patterns
and team structures first
to actively encourage the
desired software architecture.
Instead of letting the org
structure dictate the system,
we design the org structure
to enable the system we want.
Let's delve deeper into
this powerful maneuver!
So, how do we actually use
this inverse Conway maneuver?
It's all about intentionally
taking advantage
of the mirroring effect that
Conway's Law describes.
Now, let's start a brief
history lesson here,
because this isn't
just a recent idea.
Research has backed
this up for quite some time.
Way back in 2012,
Alan McCormack and his colleagues
highlighted this dynamic, stating:
“Products tend to ‘mirror’ the
architectures of the organizations...
...in which they are developed.
This dynamic occurs because the
organization’s governance structures,
problem solving routines,
and communication patterns...
...constrain the space in which
it searches for new solutions.”
In other words, the way we're set up
limits the kinds of solutions
we can even think of.
Therefore, to increase our chances of
building truly effective software systems
optimized for that
end-to-end flow we desire,
we can undertake an
“Inverse Conway Maneuver”
(sometimes called the
Reverse Conway Maneuver).
The core idea is to
intentionally reconfigure
the team intercommunications
before the software is finalized.
The Inverse Conway
Maneuver implies that we should
actively design our teams to match
the software architecture we need.
Now, our history
lesson continues.
While the idea of
influencing architecture
through organizational
design was gaining traction,
the specific term "Inverse Conway Maneuver"
got a significant boost when it appeared
on the Thoughtworks Technology Radar.
Back in July 2014, in Volume 10,
Thoughtworks explicitly added
the Inverse Conway Maneuver,
placing it in the "Trial" ring,
signaling it as something companies
should consider experimenting with.
This marked a notable recognition
of the concept within the industry.
However, the Inverse Conway Maneuver's
official stay on the
Radar was relatively brief.
As you can see, it appeared
again in the January 2015 edition,
still in the "Trial" ring,
with the same description
emphasizing evolving team structures
to promote desired architecture.
But after that? It dropped
off the radar editions.
Thoughtworks explains
they don't have the bandwidth
to continuously
review older blips.
So, while impactful,
its time as an explicitly tracked
item on the influential radar
was limited to those two appearances
in late 2014 and early 2015.
So, the Inverse
Conway Maneuver, ICM,
faded from the official
radar listings after early 2015.
But! Fast forward to May 2023,
and look what popped up on the Thoughtworks
Insights blog: a dedicated article titled
"Inverse-Conway-Maneuver: How to speed
up product development teams successfully."
Why the revival?
The blog post argues that
in today's complex world
with increasing pressure for
speed and customer-centricity,
consciously designing teams
around product value streams
(a core application of the ICM)
is more critical than ever to reduce
dependencies and accelerate delivery.
It's essentially framing ICM as
a key enabler for modern
product development effectiveness.
Our brief history lesson now
brings us closer to the present day,
where the ideas underpinning
the Inverse Conway Maneuver
became integrated into
industry-shaping research and frameworks.
Dr. Nicole Forsgren and her
colleagues discussed its importance
back in 2018 in their
foundational book, "Accelerate,"
based on years of
rigorous research
analyzing what makes high-performing
technology organizations tick.
They state: “Our research lends
support to what is sometimes called...
... the “Inverse Conway Maneuver”,
which states that organizations should...
...evolve their team and
organizational structure...
...to achieve the
desired architecture.
The goal is for your architecture
to support the ability of teams...
...to get their work done — from
design through to deployment —
without requiring high-bandwidth
communication between teams.”
This highlights a
critical objective:
designing both our
architecture and our organization
so teams can operate
more autonomously,
reducing the need for constant,
time-consuming communication
and coordination
across team boundaries.
And that concludes
our look back!
This powerful approach,
validated by Accelerate's research,
truly gained widespread traction and
became more practically understood
with the release of the “Team
Topologies” book in 2019,
which builds heavily
on this principle of
intentionally designing organizations
for better software systems.
So, how does this Inverse
Conway Maneuver fit
into the broader picture
we've been painting?
In our first video, we explored
'Why Platform Engineering is
the Natural Evolution of DevOps,'
discussing how it addresses the
cognitive load and flow challenges
that often emerged
as DevOps matured.
Now, we'll connect
those ideas directly.
We'll explore how intentionally
designing our organization
– applying the Inverse
Conway Maneuver –
is crucial for unlocking
the full potential
of both Platform Engineering
and the original goals of DevOps.
If you haven't watched
that introductory video yet,
I highly recommend
checking it out first,
as it lays much of the
groundwork for today's discussion.
Alright, ready to
dive deeper into
how different organizational
structures impact our flow?
Let's look at some common
DevOps team setups.
To understand how different
organizational structures
impact flow and architecture,
it's helpful to look at
established patterns.
Back in 2013,
Matthew Skelton published the
original DevOps Topologies patterns,
which have since become a
standard way for the industry
to discuss the pros and cons of various
team designs for software delivery.
You can see here a
range of both anti-types
– structures likely
to cause problems –
and types with varying
potential for success.
The DevOps Topologies collection
helps organizations analyze
these different patterns
and improve their software
delivery and operational capabilities.
As Matthew Skelton stated:
“By exploring the
strengths and weaknesses...
...of these team
structures (or ‘topologies’),
we can identify the team
structure which might work best...
...for DevOps practices
in our own organisations,
taking into account
Conway’s Law.”
So, let's use this framework
and have a look specifically at
the topologies considered
to have high potential.
Okay, Looking at the
DevOps Topologies,
two patterns stand out with
HIGH potential effectiveness.
Type 1: Dev and
Ops Collaboration.
Here, Development and Operations
teams work closely together,
maintaining separate team structures
but fostering strong
communication and shared goals.
Type 2: Fully Shared
Ops Responsibilities.
This model goes a step further,
embedding operational responsibilities
directly within the development teams.
It's the classic "you build it, you
own it" approach fully realized.
Notice the visual representation
for both Type 1 and Type 2.
The circles representing
Dev and Ops are overlapping.
This isn't just a coincidence;
that close integration and
shared space are fundamental to
why these topologies are
considered highly effective
in the original DevOps model.
They represent the ideal of
breaking down silos and
fostering deep collaboration.
But... does high potential come
with its own challenges? Let's see.
“Each service must be
fully owned by a team...
...with sufficient cognitive
capacity to build and operate it.”
Remember that sentence from
our DevOps evolution video?
It embodies the 'you build it,
you own it' DevOps mantra,
linking true Responsibility
(and Mandate)
to the necessary Knowledge
and cognitive capacity required.
Without Responsibility, we saw how
we get the 'broken DevOps' scenario,
tossing work over the
metaphorical ‘wall of confusion’.
The collaborative,
high-potential topologies
like Type 1 and Type 2
aim to tear down that wall.
But removing the wall
often shifts the pressure
onto the Knowledge
aspect of ownership.
We expect teams
to be cross-functional
and handle
everything end-to-end,
but as we discussed,
the modern Ops landscape
is incredibly complex.
This creates a new constraint:
the sheer cognitive load of being
knowledgeable across the entire stack.
Furthermore, as teams grow,
communication overhead
explodes exponentially,
making deep knowledge sharing
and alignment incredibly difficult –
think Dunbar's number limiting
effective close collaboration.
Expecting a single team to
master and effectively communicate
across too broad a domain inherently
strains their cognitive capacity.
This isn't a new problem.
Back in 2015,
Peter Neumark
accurately pointed out:
“Despite striving to be cross-functional,
one of the thornier problems
product teams often face...
...is lacking some
necessary competence."
So, we arrive at a
crucial realization:
the very DevOps
topologies identified as
having the highest
potential for effectiveness
– those deeply
collaborative models –
often come hand-in-hand with the highest
cognitive load for the teams involved.
It's a direct consequence
of expecting teams
to own and know everything end-to-end
in today's complex environments.
So, we have this
inherent tension:
team autonomy, which increases
flow by reducing handoffs,
often clashes with the lack of
deep, specialized competence
across the entire required
stack, which decreases flow.
The reality is, there's
no silver bullet here.
It forces a trade-off between
end-to-end Responsibility
(granting teams full autonomy)
and managing the cognitive
load that comes with
expecting deep, end-to-end
Knowledge in every domain.
I recently fell in love with
this phrase from Esther Perel:
"A paradox to manage,
not a problem to solve."
And I think it applies
perfectly here.
There might not be a way to
completely eliminate this tension
between broad responsibility
and deep knowledge.
Instead, we need to find
ways to manage the paradox,
navigate the trade-off,
and balance the polarity
effectively within our specific context.
So how do we actively
manage this paradox?
One useful tool is
Polarity Mapping.
It helps us visualize and navigate
dilemmas that are ongoing,
seemingly unsolvable, and contain
opposing, yet interdependent, ideas.
Let's look at this polarity map
tailored for our DevOps situation.
On the left pole, we have High
Responsibility (End-to-End) –
think "you build
it, you own it."
The upsides are
clear: faster feedback,
reduced handoffs, increased
ownership, better collaboration,
and potentially higher velocity.
But the downsides, the unintended
consequences, are significant:
cognitive overload, potential
burnout, inconsistent standards,
difficulty scaling expertise,
and the risk of errors
due to a lack of deep
knowledge everywhere.
On the right pole, we have
High Knowledge (Specialized) –
reminiscent of the
older siloed world.
The benefits? Deep expertise,
optimized performance,
standardized practices,
and potentially higher quality.
But the downsides are equally familiar:
siloed information,
slower changes,
bottlenecks around experts,
and reduced adaptability.
The tension is clear: we
want the upsides of both poles –
the autonomy and speed
of end-to-end responsibility
and the quality and depth
of specialized knowledge.
We want to achieve
our greater purpose,
shown at the top: Increased Flow.
And we want to avoid the
downsides of both poles,
which lead to our fear, at
the bottom: Decreased Flow.
How does this map help
us find a way forward,
especially towards
Platform Engineering?
It starkly highlights the
negative consequences of
pushing too hard on the
"High Responsibility" pole
without support –
particularly cognitive overload.
This visually demonstrates
why many teams get stuck.
It makes the case for needing
mechanisms to mitigate those downsides.
This is precisely where
concepts from Team Topologies,
like a Platform Team providing curated,
self-service capabilities, come in.
Such a platform aims to
offload specific cognitive burdens
(like infrastructure
complexity or security tooling),
allowing stream-aligned teams to retain
high responsibility for their core domain
while benefiting from specialized
knowledge embedded in the platform.
It helps us manage the polarity,
keeping us in the upper quadrants.
Suggestion: This map is
a powerful diagnostic tool.
To make it even more actionable,
you could use it in workshops
to add specific "Action Steps"
(how do we get more
benefits of both poles?)
and "Early Warnings"
(what are the signs we're
slipping into the downsides?).
So, we've identified these highly
collaborative DevOps topologies
– Type 1 and Type 2 –
as having the highest
potential effectiveness
according to the
original patterns.
They embody the DevOps
ideal of breaking down silos.
However, as we just discussed,
this high potential often comes
with a significant downside:
high cognitive load.
Teams are expected to know
and manage everything end-to-end.
And this cognitive load is
precisely why many organizations
find themselves
"Stuck in the middle,"
as highlighted in the 2021
State of DevOps Report.
Teams adopt these collaborative
structures aiming for high performance,
but the sheer weight of
managing the complexity
– the tools, the infrastructure,
the security, the operational tasks –
prevents them from
truly accelerating.
They hit a plateau because the
cognitive burden slows down value delivery,
increases the chance of errors, and hinders
their ability to focus on innovation.
They have the potential
to be high performers,
but the cognitive
load keeps them stuck.
Now, it's fair to say other
factors like chronic underfunding,
technical debt, or shifting priorities
can also contribute to teams getting stuck.
However, the
intense cognitive load,
directly linked to the complexity these
high-potential collaborative structures
must manage, represents
a critical bottleneck
that organizational
redesign strategies
like Platform Engineering
specifically aim to alleviate.
Viewed through the
lens of Conway’s Law,
the organizational design
itself becomes the constraint
that causes many DevOps
initiatives to get “stuck in the middle.”
Pushing for high collaboration without
addressing the resulting cognitive load
creates a bottleneck
inherent in the structure.
To break free, we can't just
focus on tools or processes;
we have to make team-of-teams
design part of our strategic plan.
We need to actively use the
mirroring effect of Conway’s Law
to our advantage with an
Inverse Conway Maneuver.
So, how do we start designing
our organization for better flow?
Niels Pflaeging, in his book "Organize
for Complexity," offers a key insight:
“The key to successful knowledge
work is in the interactions...
...between the informal structure
and the value creating structure.”
This suggests that our focus
shouldn't just be on formal org charts,
but on how teams actually interact based
on the real needs of delivering value.
This aligns perfectly with the
Team Topologies approach,
which advocates starting
with stream-aligned teams –
those focused directly on a business
domain or organizational capability.
Understanding their
value-creating structure
and their real interaction
needs (the informal structure)
is the crucial first step of our
Inverse Conway Maneuver.
But, as our polarity map showed,
simply aligning teams to value
streams runs into the trade-off
between the scope
of their Responsibility
and the cognitive load imposed
by the required Knowledge.
How do we manage that?
It's time to extend
our inverse maneuver
and apply another team
topology – platforms –
designed specifically
to reduce cognitive load
through clear boundaries
and well-defined services.
So, how can we approach these potentially
significant organizational changes,
like applying the Inverse Conway
Maneuver, in a structured way?
The Lean Value Tree (LVT),
which we touched upon
in the Vision to Goal video,
offers a fantastic framework.
It helps us visualize
our strategy,
cascading from a
high-level Goal down
through testable Hypotheses
(or Bets) to concrete Initiatives.
Crucially, the LVT allows us to
treat organizational design changes
not as disruptive Big
Bang reorganizations,
but as controlled experiments
via testable hypotheses.
We're essentially saying,
"We bet that changing our team
structure or introducing a platform team...
...will lead to this specific,
measurable outcome."
Let's look at two examples.
Example 1 (Value
Stream Alignment):
The Goal here is clear:
Increase time to market speed.
The Hypothesis or Bet is a classic Inverse
Conway Maneuver focused on value streams:
If we reshape teams
around value domains,
we'll reduce dependencies
and lead time.
The Initiatives – mapping
domains and piloting a cluster team –
are the first concrete
steps to test this bet.
We measure success
by tracking lead time,
waiting time, and the ratio
of self-reliant backlog items.
This directly relates to
that first step we discussed:
aligning teams to the
value-creating structure.
Example 2 (Platform
Team Introduction):
Here, the Goal is potentially
to Increase product margin.
The Hypothesis links directly to
the second step of our maneuver –
offloading cognitive load: If we
establish a self-service platform,
we'll reduce cognitive load, free up time
for innovation, and thus improve margins.
The Initiatives involve
growing the platform team and
onboarding an internal customer.
Success is measured
through product P&L,
the number of
successful experiments,
and the ratio of technical
vs. non-technical tasks
for the value stream teams.
Using the LVT,
we frame organizational engineering
as an experimental, iterative process,
allowing us to learn
and adapt quickly,
ensuring our changes are
tied to tangible business goals
and validated by
measurable outcomes.
Crucially, while the ultimate
goal is business impact
(like faster time-to-market
or higher margins),
we should also define
leading indicators
to measure the success of
the organizational change itself.
Are inter-team dependencies
actually decreasing?
Is cognitive load
perceived to be lower?
Tracking metrics like
dependency counts, types,
resolution times, or even
team sentiment surveys
can give us much faster feedback
to de-risk the change
and adapt the initiative well
before the final business
outcome fully materializes.
So, how do those
structured experiments
from the Lean Value Tree
help us tackle common
organizational dysfunctions?
Let's look at a
typical scenario.
On the left,
we see what often happens in
organizations with traditional silos,
even if they try to put a
modern API or portal on top.
It looks like self-service,
like the magical machine
of the Wizard of Oz,
but behind the curtain,
it's still just manual handoffs
between different teams –
Wintel, DBAs, Middleware...
This is "TicketOps" disguised.
The result? Coupled
backlogs, long lead times,
and frustrated developers
who don't have true self-service.
It's an artificial cloud,
relying on the "man
behind the curtain."
Now, contrast that with
the image on the right:
the vending machine.
This represents the goal –
genuine self-service
IaaS or PaaS.
Developers can instantly
get the resources they need,
predictably and reliably,
without hidden manual steps
or complex dependencies.
The Inverse Conway Maneuver,
guided by hypotheses
tested through the LVT,
is the engine for
this transformation.
By intentionally redesigning
team interactions,
perhaps by creating a
dedicated platform team
focused on automation and providing
genuine self-service capabilities
(like the initiatives
in our LVT examples),
we can dismantle the "man
behind the curtain" setup.
We replace the slow, opaque,
handover-driven process
with a fast, transparent,
automated "vending machine,"
enabling true developer
autonomy and faster flow.
That transformation from
the hidden complexity of
the "Wizard of Oz" to the
clear, self-service model
of the "vending machine"
relies on establishing clear
boundaries and responsibilities.
This brings us back to a concept we
touched upon in the DevOps evolution video:
"Good fences make
good neighbors."
This phrase, highlighted in
Hannah Foxwell’s presentation
on shifting left the right way,
emphasizes the need
for well-defined interfaces
and ownership
between teams or layers.
These "fences" are key to managing
cognitive load and enabling flow.
Before we explore
the fences needed
to truly escape "the middle"
with high-performing setups,
let's first look at some common
"medium-potential" topologies
that represent a significant
step forward from traditional silos,
often forming the foundation.
Let's look at how these
"medium-potential" topologies
build some of those
necessary "fences".
Here we see Type 3: Ops as
Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS).
The Ops team essentially
provides the underlying infrastructure
– compute, storage, networking –
as a consumable service
to the application teams.
Think of it as providing
the basic building blocks.
And Type 8:
Container-Driven Collaboration
often implies a
Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) model,
where the Ops or platform team
provides a container orchestration platform
(like Kubernetes) and
related tooling as a service.
Application teams deploy
their containerized applications
onto this managed platform.
In both cases,
the Ops/Platform team
abstracts the complexities
of the underlying layer
and offers it as a service.
This aligns perfectly with the
XaaS (Everything-as-a-Service)
interaction mode described
in Team Topologies.
The platform provides, the
application team consumes.
The core goal here
is cognitive offloading.
The burden of managing raw infrastructure
or the intricacies of Kubernetes
is shifted away from the application teams
and onto the specialized platform team.
This frees up the application
developers to focus higher up the stack.
And this self-service access
to standardized infrastructure
or platform resources?
That's our vending
machine in action!
Developers can get
the compute, storage,
or container runtime
they need, on-demand,
without needing to know how the
machine itself is built or maintained.
Now, having an Ops
or Platform team provide
infrastructure or
containers as a service
– like our vending machine –
is undoubtedly a huge step forward
compared to traditional Dev and Ops silos.
These Type 3 and Type 8
topologies establish crucial "fences,"
enable self-service for
foundational resources,
and definitely help reduce some
cognitive load for application teams.
However, are they enough
to truly escape the "Stuck
in the middle" phase?
Often, the answer is no.
Why? Because while
these topologies offload
the burden of managing
the lowest layers of the stack
(the raw infrastructure
or the container platform),
they often don't address the
complexity that sits just above it.
Application teams still need
to figure out CI/CD pipelines,
testing frameworks, security
scanning, observability setup,
secret management, database
provisioning, and potentially much more.
These reusable IaaS
or PaaS building blocks
don't automatically solve
the operational challenges
related to the
application lifecycle itself.
Significant cognitive load
related to gluing services together,
configuration, and
operational best practices
remains squarely on the
shoulders of the application teams.
Therefore, while valuable,
these medium-potential topologies often
don't provide enough cognitive offloading
across the full development
and delivery lifecycle
to propel teams into the
high-performing category.
The remaining burden
keeps them... well, stuck.
So, if the "vending machine"
of basic IaaS or PaaS
isn't enough to fully
unblock our teams,
what's the next step in our
Inverse Conway Maneuver?
We need to build another,
higher-level "fence."
Look at this diagram, again inspired
by Hannah Foxwell's presentation,
but now showing all
three distinct layers:
Infrastructure, Platforms,
and Applications.
This middle Platform layer
is where we can introduce
a true Internal
Developer Platform (IDP).
Of course, the
success hinges on this
being a well-designed
and maintained IDP,
built with a product mindset
– something we explored in
the 'Platform-as-a-Product' video.
A bad platform can
indeed hinder flow.
An IDP, built and maintained by a
dedicated Platform Engineering team,
goes beyond just providing
infrastructure building blocks.
It offers curated, self-service
workflows and tools
– the Golden Paths –
that guide developers through
common tasks across the entire SDLC.
Think CI/CD, testing,
deployment strategies,
observability, security scanning
– all packaged and presented in a
consistent, easy-to-consume way.
If we want to stick
with our Oz metaphors,
while the infrastructure
layer might provide
the basic "vending
machine" for resources,
the IDP layer paves
the smooth, well-lit
"Yellow Brick Road"
for developers to follow,
drastically reducing
their cognitive load
and enabling them to focus
on delivering application value.
This is how we truly
empower stream-aligned teams
and help them escape the
"stuck in the middle" plateau.
Now, a quick but
important clarification:
the term "platform"
can be a bit overloaded.
We've seen "Platform"
as a team topology
(like Type 3 Ops providing IaaS)
often operating at
the infrastructure layer.
Here, we're also talking
about the technical layer itself
– in this case the IDP –
built by a dedicated
Platform Engineering team,
which sits above
the infrastructure.
It's crucial to distinguish between these
concepts when designing our organization.
So, we have these
distinct layers:
Infrastructure, Platforms
(IDP), and Applications.
A key principle, building
on the "good fences" idea,
is applying the "you build it, you own
it" DevOps mindset within each layer.
The Infrastructure team owns
the IaaS/PaaS services they provide
via a well-defined XaaS
(Everything-as-a-Service) interaction mode.
The Platform team owns
the IDP and its Golden Paths,
offered via another
clear XaaS interface.
And the Application teams own
their applications, built on the platform.
Each layer operates with autonomy
and responsibility for its domain.
Applying the Inverse
Conway Maneuver effectively
often involves intentionally
designing these interactions
to minimize costly,
high-bandwidth Collaboration
and instead favour efficient XaaS
or targeted Facilitation modes,
depending on the context
and maturity of the services.
How do we get there?
Implementing a full-fledged IDP
on top of a robust
IaaS/PaaS layer
can be a significant
undertaking.
Therefore, a phased
approach often makes sense,
especially when applying
the Inverse Conway Maneuver.
Phase 1: Establish the
Foundation (IaaS/PaaS).
Focus first on building the
reliable "vending machine"
– automating
infrastructure provisioning
and offering basic IaaS or
container platform (PaaS) capabilities
as self-service (like DevOps
Topologies Type 3 or 8).
This involves creating
a capable infrastructure
or platform team
focused on this layer.
Phase 2: Build the IDP.
Once the foundation is solid,
build the IDP layer on top,
creating the "Yellow Brick
Road" with Golden Paths,
CI/CD, observability, etc., managed by
a dedicated Platform Engineering team
(potentially evolving from or collaborating
with the initial infrastructure team).
What are the trade-offs
of this phased approach?
Pros: It breaks down a massive
change into more manageable steps,
reducing risk and the initial
cognitive load for the platform builders.
It allows the organization
to learn and iterate.
It delivers incremental
value sooner,
as even basic IaaS/PaaS
self-service is often a big improvement.
Cons: It takes longer to realize the
full benefits of a comprehensive IDP.
Application teams might
remain "stuck" for longer,
dealing with complexities
above the IaaS/PaaS layer.
There's also a risk that the
organization stops at Phase 1,
deeming the "vending
machine" "good enough,"
never reaching the full potential
of the "Yellow Brick Road."
Remember our discussion in the "From
Product Vision to Product Goal" video,
particularly regarding
on-premise environments?
We highlighted the critical
need to "fix the infra first."
Often, especially on-prem, that
reliable, automatable IaaS layer
– the vending machine –
simply doesn't exist.
In such cases,
building that foundation
must be the priority
before attempting to build a
sophisticated IDP on shaky ground.
Trying to build the Yellow Brick
Road without solid ground underneath
leads to frustration
and failure.
This all requires investment,
but the aim is to consolidate efforts
currently fragmented across many teams,
reducing overall waste.
Success also depends
on well-managed interfaces
– those 'good fences' –
between the layers.
This journey – from recognizing
the impact of Conway's Law,
to managing the
Responsibility-Knowledge paradox,
to intentionally designing our
layers and team interactions
using the Inverse
Conway Maneuver –
brings us to a
fundamental insight
about leadership in
modern tech organizations.
Ray Dalio captures it perfectly:
“Understand that
a great manager...
...is essentially an
organizational engineer.”
This is the key message.
We've seen how team
structures, boundaries,
and communication pathways
directly constrain or enable
our technical architecture and
our ability to deliver value quickly.
This deep
interdependence highlights
that we are always working
within socio-technical systems –
where the social aspects
(teams, culture, communication)
and technical aspects (architecture, tools)
are inseparable and must
be designed holistically.
Therefore, shaping
the organization
– designing the team-of-teams –
isn't just an HR function;
it's a critical
engineering discipline,
a form of
socio-technical design,
with profound
technical consequences.
So, if applying Team
Topologies principles
and the Inverse Conway Maneuver
seems like the logical
way to break free from
being "stuck in the middle"
and achieve fast flow...
then why is it often so hard for
organizations to get started?
From a manager's perspective,
restructuring teams is inherently
complex and often perceived as risky.
It disrupts established
routines, reporting lines, budgets,
and sometimes even challenges
existing power structures or "fiefdoms".
It requires not only understanding
organizational dynamics
but also grasping
the deep connection
to technical architecture
dictated by Conway's Law.
Getting buy-in across different parts
of the organization can be difficult,
significant investment
might be needed,
and the immediate return
isn't always easy to measure.
Furthermore, managers
might lack the explicit mandate
or feel hesitant due to past experiences
with painful, ineffective reorganizations.
This iterative,
hypothesis-driven approach,
focusing on clear boundaries
and interaction mode
like those in Team Topologies,
contrasts sharply with the often
disruptive, top-down 're-orgs' of the past.
However, successfully
applying this iterative maneuver
depends heavily on supportive
conditions like psychological safety
(allowing teams to experiment
and learn without fear of blame),
strong leadership commitment that champions
the change beyond just line management,
building trust across teams,
and embracing organizational
design as an ongoing, adaptive process.
While these cultural
elements are crucial,
the relationship
works both ways:
intentionally designing team
structures and interactions
for clarity and
reduced friction,
as advocated by Team Topologies,
can itself help foster trust and a
more collaborative culture over time,
provided leadership actively
champions the evolution.
It's important to note, however,
that while traditional managers
often hold the formal authority
for organizational change,
the work of
organizational engineering
doesn't have to fall
solely on their shoulders.
This analysis,
design, and facilitation
can also be driven
by specialized groups,
perhaps akin to
an "Enabling Team"
as described in Team Topologies,
who are tasked with
guiding and supporting
the organization's evolution
towards more effective structures.
One more thing…
We've spent this whole time
talking about Conway's Law
and how crucial the
Inverse Conway Maneuver is
for designing effective
organizations and enabling flow.
But... what if the very
foundation we've been discussing
isn't always the most useful
starting point for the conversation?
We've established the power
of the Inverse Conway Maneuver
as a tool for
organizational engineering.
But, is explicitly talking about
Conway's Law always necessary?
Recently, Matthew Skelton,
co-author of Team Topologies,
reflected on LinkedIn that he hasn't
really needed to explain Conway's Law
for the past couple of years when
discussing the value of Team Topologies,
especially with
senior executives.
He argues that the core
Team Topologies principles –
like focusing on
flow without handoffs,
staying close to the customer,
and using cognitive load
as a design principle –
are often more direct and compelling
arguments for change on their own.
Interestingly, just a
few years prior, in 2022,
his co-author Manuel Pais
gave a presentation titled
"Conway’s Law Is
Out to Get You!" –
highlighting how central it
was to the conversation then.
So, the emphasis
seems to be shifting.
As I suggested in my
reply to Matthew's post,
perhaps Conway's Law is becoming
less of a foundational requirement
and more of a useful
storytelling tool.
What are the pros and cons here?
Pro (talking flow directly):
Focusing purely on principles
like eliminating handoffs,
reducing cognitive load,
and improving flow might
be more direct, practical,
and relatable for
certain audiences.
It avoids potentially academic
discussions about a decades-old "law".
Con (losing the narrative):
However, ignoring Conway's Law
means losing a powerful explanation
for why existing siloed structures
often lead to tangled, inefficient systems.
For teams suffering from the
effects of accidental Conway mirroring
(like TicketOps
behind a facade),
invoking the law can
be an "aha!" moment,
clearly framing the problem
and justifying the need
for intentional redesign
based on Team Topologies.
Ultimately, the goal is
designing for fast flow.
Whether you explicitly
use Conway's Law
to make your case might
depend on your audience
and the specific pain
points you're addressing.
The underlying principles
of reducing handoffs
and managing cognitive
load remain paramount.
So, if talking directly about
Conway's Law isn't always necessary,
how can we pragmatically start the
conversation about improving flow?
One extremely effective way is by
focusing directly on team dependencies.
Look at this simple but powerful
tool suggested by Team Topologies:
Team Dependencies Tracking.
It involves systematically
identifying and documenting:
- Which team depends
on which other team?
- What is the nature
of that dependency?
- Is it blocking
progress entirely?
- Is it just slowing
things down?
- Or is it a healthy, well-managed
dependency (marked as ok)?
- Does the dependency
cross different value streams?
- And what exactly
is the dependency?
is it waiting for an
artifact, an approval,
some specific knowledge,
or something else?
This approach is
incredibly pragmatic.
Instead of starting
with theoretical laws
or abstract
organizational models,
you focus on the concrete,
day-to-day friction points
that are actually
hindering your teams.
Where are the bottlenecks?
Where are the
handoffs causing delays?
By mapping these dependencies,
you create a clear, data-driven
picture of where flow is being impeded.
It provides tangible evidence
and shifts the conversation
towards specific, actionable problems.
Furthermore, this tracking
provides exactly the kind of data
you need for those leading
indicators we discussed earlier
when framing organizational
changes as testable hypotheses –
it gives you concrete
evidence of whether
your interventions are
actually reducing friction.
And notice,
we haven't needed to
mention Conway's Law at all!
We're simply
identifying and analyzing
the real obstacles to
getting work done efficiently.
Once we've mapped
out those dependencies
using the tracking method
from the previous slide,
what do we do with
that information?
Team Topologies
provides clear guidance:
Eliminate blocking dependencies.
Mitigate slow dependencies.
Keep healthy dependencies.
This is a direct,
action-oriented approach
focused squarely
on improving flow.
By systematically
identifying and then
actively working to
remove or reduce the friction
caused by these
inter-team dependencies,
you are directly
tackling the bottlenecks.
You're clearing the path for
work to move more smoothly.
This focus on minimizing
handoffs and delays
achieves the
goal of faster flow,
fulfilling a core principle
of Team Topologies – and,
as Matthew Skelton suggested,
you can achieve this outcome
without explicitly invoking Conway's Law.
The practical actions
speak for themselves.
However, understanding why those
blocking or slowing dependencies
exist in the first
place can be crucial
for advocating for more
fundamental change.
Often, the root cause
isn't just a missing tool
or a poorly defined process;
it's the organizational
structure itself – the legacy silos.
This is where referencing Conway's
Law can still be incredibly useful.
Think back to our Wizard of Oz metaphor.
Those blocking or slowing
dependencies are often
the clumsy actions of the
"man behind the curtain" –
the manual handoffs,
the ticket queues,
the coordination meetings necessitated
by a fragmented team structure.
Conway's Law helps explain why that
"man behind the curtain" structure exists
and why it inevitably creates
these kinds of inefficient interactions,
mirroring the organizational
silos in the system's workflow.
So, while you can improve flow
by simply tackling the
dependencies you find,
using Conway's Law
as a narrative tool
helps make the case for a
more sustainable solution:
applying the Inverse
Conway Maneuver.
It explains why restructuring
towards well-defined team types
and interaction modes, like
those in Team Topologies,
is necessary to permanently
eliminate those blocking dependencies,
rather than just patching
over the symptoms.
It provides the 'why' behind
redesigning the organization
to build the fast-flowing
system you need,
ultimately reducing
the hidden costs
of friction and delay
inherent in the old structure.
And that brings us to the
end of our bonus exploration
into the Inverse
Conway Maneuver!
We started with Conway's Law,
understanding how our team
communication structures
inevitably shape our
system architectures.
We saw how fighting this law
leads to friction and obstacles,
often keeping teams
"stuck in the middle."
Then, we flipped the script,
exploring the Inverse
Conway Maneuver –
intentionally designing
our organization
to enable the architecture
and fast flow we desire.
We looked at managing the
Responsibility-Knowledge paradox,
the role of different
layers like IaaS, PaaS,
and IDPs in offloading
cognitive load,
and how frameworks
like Lean Value Trees
can guide organizational
engineering as a testable hypothesis.
We even questioned whether
explicitly mentioning Conway's Law
is always necessary, highlighting pragmatic
approaches like dependency tracking.
The core takeaway?
As Martin Fowler emphasized,
“The key thing to remember
about Conway's Law...
...is that the modular
decomposition of a system...
and the decomposition of the development
organization must be done together.”
Designing our teams is
designing our systems.
Great managers (or
dedicated enabling teams)
act as organizational engineers,
shaping the team-of-teams structure
to unlock fast flow and
developer productivity.
Whether you're battling
the "man behind the curtain"
or building a reliable "vending machine"
and paving the "Yellow Brick Road,"
intentional
organizational design –
managed iteratively and focused
on reducing friction – is paramount.
Thank you so
much for joining me!
I hope this dive into organizational
design for fast flow was insightful.
What are your experiences
with Conway's Law
or applying the Inverse
Conway Maneuver?
Let me know in the
comments below!
Don't forget to check
out the other videos
in the Platform Engineering
series if you haven't already.
See you next time!
Thank you for sticking
around to the end.
The remainder of this video contains
an overview of all resources used.
There's some
great stuff out there,
often with references
to even more great stuff.
Are you ready to go
down this rabbit hole?